In relating the circumstances which have led to my confinement within this refuge for the demented,
I am aware that my present position will create a natural doubt of the authenticity of my narrative.
It is an unfortunate fact that the bulk of humanity is too limited in its mental vision to weigh
with patience and intelligence those isolated phenomena, seen and felt only by a psychologically
sensitive few, which lie outside its common experience. Men of broader intellect know that there
is no sharp distinction betwixt the real and the unreal; that all things appear as they do only
by virtue of the delicate individual physical and mental media through which we are made conscious
of them; but the prosaic materialism of the majority condemns as madness the flashes of super-sight
which penetrate the common veil of obvious empiricism.

My name is Jervas Dudley, and from earliest childhood I have been a dreamer
and a visionary. Wealthy beyond the necessity of a commercial life, and temperamentally unfitted
for the formal studies and social recreations of my acquaintances, I have dwelt ever in realms
apart from the visible world; spending my youth and adolescence in ancient and little-known
books, and in roaming the fields and groves of the region near my ancestral home. I do not think
that what I read in these books or saw in these fields and groves was exactly what other boys
read and saw there; but of this I must say little, since detailed speech would but confirm those
cruel slanders upon my intellect which I sometimes overhear from the whispers of the stealthy
attendants around me. It is sufficient for me to relate events without analysing causes.

I have said that I dwelt apart from the visible world, but I have not said
that I dwelt alone. This no human creature may do; for lacking the fellowship of the living,
he inevitably draws upon the companionship of things that are not, or are no longer, living.
Close by my home there lies a singular wooded hollow, in whose twilight deeps I spent most of
my time; reading, thinking, and dreaming. Down its moss-covered slopes my first steps of infancy
were taken, and around its grotesquely gnarled oak trees my first fancies of boyhood were woven.
Well did I come to know the presiding dryads of those trees, and often have I watched their
wild dances in the struggling beams of a waning moon&mdash;but of these things I must not now
speak. I will tell only of the lone tomb in the darkest of the hillside thickets; the deserted
tomb of the Hydes, an old and exalted family whose last direct descendant had been laid within
its black recesses many decades before my birth.

The vault to which I refer is of ancient granite, weathered and discoloured
by the mists and dampness of generations. Excavated back into the hillside, the structure is
visible only at the entrance. The door, a ponderous and forbidding slab of stone, hangs upon
rusted iron hinges, and is fastened <i>ajar</i> in a queerly sinister way by means of heavy
iron chains and padlocks, according to a gruesome fashion of half a century ago. The abode of
the race whose scions are here inurned had once crowned the declivity which holds the tomb,
but had long since fallen victim to the flames which sprang up from a disastrous stroke of lightning.
Of the midnight storm which destroyed this gloomy mansion, the older inhabitants of the region
sometimes speak in hushed and uneasy voices; alluding to what they call &ldquo;divine wrath&rdquo;
in a manner that in later years vaguely increased the always strong fascination which I felt
for the forest-darkened sepulchre. One man only had perished in the fire. When the last of the
Hydes was buried in this place of shade and stillness, the sad urnful of ashes had come from
a distant land; to which the family had repaired when the mansion burned down. No one remains
to lay flowers before the granite portal, and few care to brave the depressing shadows which
seem to linger strangely about the water-worn stones. 

I shall never forget the afternoon when first I stumbled upon the half-hidden
house of death. It was in mid-summer, when the alchemy of Nature transmutes the sylvan landscape
to one vivid and almost homogeneous mass of green; when the senses are well-nigh intoxicated
with the surging seas of moist verdure and the subtly indefinable odours of the soil and the
vegetation. In such surroundings the mind loses its perspective; time and space become trivial
and unreal, and echoes of a forgotten prehistoric past beat insistently upon the enthralled
consciousness. All day I had been wandering through the mystic groves of the hollow; thinking
thoughts I need not discuss, and conversing with things I need not name. In years a child of
ten, I had seen and heard many wonders unknown to the throng; and was oddly aged in certain
respects. When, upon forcing my way between two savage clumps of briers, I suddenly encountered
the entrance of the vault, I had no knowledge of what I had discovered. The dark blocks of granite,
the door so curiously ajar, and the funereal carvings above the arch, aroused in me no associations
of mournful or terrible character. Of graves and tombs I knew and imagined much, but had on
account of my peculiar temperament been kept from all personal contact with churchyards and
cemeteries. The strange stone house on the woodland slope was to me only a source of interest
and speculation; and its cold, damp interior, into which I vainly peered through the aperture
so tantalisingly left, contained for me no hint of death or decay. But in that instant of curiosity
was born the madly unreasoning desire which has brought me to this hell of confinement. Spurred
on by a voice which must have come from the hideous soul of the forest, I resolved to enter
the beckoning gloom in spite of the ponderous chains which barred my passage. In the waning
light of day I alternately rattled the rusty impediments with a view to throwing wide the stone
door, and essayed to squeeze my slight form through the space already provided; but neither
plan met with success. At first curious, I was now frantic; and when in the thickening twilight
I returned to my home, I had sworn to the hundred gods of the grove that <i>at any cost</i>
I would some day force an entrance to the black, chilly depths that seemed calling out to me.
The physician with the iron-grey beard who comes each day to my room once told a visitor that
this decision marked the beginning of a pitiful monomania; but I will leave final judgment to
my readers when they shall have learnt all.

The months following my discovery were spent in futile attempts to force the
complicated padlock of the slightly open vault, and in carefully guarded inquiries regarding
the nature and history of the structure. With the traditionally receptive ears of the small
boy, I learned much; though an habitual secretiveness caused me to tell no one of my information
or my resolve. It is perhaps worth mentioning that I was not at all surprised or terrified on
learning of the nature of the vault. My rather original ideas regarding life and death had caused
me to associate the cold clay with the breathing body in a vague fashion; and I felt that the
great and sinister family of the burned-down mansion was in some way represented within the
stone space I sought to explore. Mumbled tales of the weird rites and godless revels of bygone
years in the ancient hall gave to me a new and potent interest in the tomb, before whose door
I would sit for hours at a time each day. Once I thrust a candle within the nearly closed entrance,
but could see nothing save a flight of damp stone steps leading downward. The odour of the place
repelled yet bewitched me. I felt I had known it before, in a past remote beyond all recollection;
beyond even my tenancy of the body I now possess.

The months following my discovery were spent in futile attempts to force the
complicated padlock of the slightly open vault, and in carefully guarded inquiries regarding
the nature and history of the structure. With the traditionally receptive ears of the small
boy, I learned much; though an habitual secretiveness caused me to tell no one of my information
or my resolve. It is perhaps worth mentioning that I was not at all surprised or terrified on
learning of the nature of the vault. My rather original ideas regarding life and death had caused
me to associate the cold clay with the breathing body in a vague fashion; and I felt that the
great and sinister family of the burned-down mansion was in some way represented within the
stone space I sought to explore. Mumbled tales of the weird rites and godless revels of bygone
years in the ancient hall gave to me a new and potent interest in the tomb, before whose door
I would sit for hours at a time each day. Once I thrust a candle within the nearly closed entrance,
but could see nothing save a flight of damp stone steps leading downward. The odour of the place
repelled yet bewitched me. I felt I had known it before, in a past remote beyond all recollection;
beyond even my tenancy of the body I now possess.

Accordingly my watches by the dank portal became less persistent, and much
of my time was spent in other though equally strange pursuits. I would sometimes rise very quietly
in the night, stealing out to walk in those churchyards and places of burial from which I had
been kept by my parents. What I did there I may not say, for I am not now sure of the reality
of certain things; but I know that on the day after such a nocturnal ramble I would often astonish
those about me with my knowledge of topics almost forgotten for many generations. It was after
a night like this that I shocked the community with a queer conceit about the burial of the
rich and celebrated Squire Brewster, a maker of local history who was interred in 1711, and
whose slate headstone, bearing a graven skull and crossbones, was slowly crumbling to powder.
In a moment of childish imagination I vowed not only that the undertaker, Goodman Simpson, had
stolen the silver-buckled shoes, silken hose, and satin small-clothes of the deceased before
burial; but that the Squire himself, not fully inanimate, had turned twice in his mound-covered
coffin on the day after interment.

But the idea of entering the tomb never left my thoughts; being indeed stimulated
by the unexpected genealogical discovery that my own maternal ancestry possessed at least a
slight link with the supposedly extinct family of the Hydes. Last of my paternal race, I was
likewise the last of this older and more mysterious line. I began to feel that the tomb was
<i>mine,</i> and to look forward with hot eagerness to the time when I might pass within that
stone door and down those slimy stone steps in the dark. I now formed the habit of <i>listening</i>
very intently at the slightly open portal, choosing my favourite hours of midnight stillness
for the odd vigil. By the time I came of age, I had made a small clearing in the thicket before
the mould-stained facade of the hillside, allowing the surrounding vegetation to encircle and
overhang the space like the walls and roof of a sylvan bower. This bower was my temple, the
fastened door my shrine, and here I would lie outstretched on the mossy ground, thinking strange
thoughts and dreaming strange dreams.

The night of the first revelation was a sultry one. I must have fallen asleep
from fatigue, for it was with a distinct sense of awakening that I heard the <i>voices.</i>
Of those tones and accents I hesitate to speak; of their <i>quality</i> I will not speak; but
I may say that they presented certain uncanny differences in vocabulary, pronunciation, and
mode of utterance. Every shade of New England dialect, from the uncouth syllables of the Puritan
colonists to the precise rhetoric of fifty years ago, seemed represented in that shadowy colloquy,
though it was only later that I noticed the fact. At the time, indeed, my attention was distracted
from this matter by another phenomenon; a phenomenon so fleeting that I could not take oath
upon its reality. I barely fancied that as I awoke, a <i>light</i> had been hurriedly extinguished
within the sunken sepulchre. I do not think I was either astounded or panic-stricken, but I
know that I was greatly and permanently <i>changed</i> that night. Upon returning home I went
with much directness to a rotting chest in the attic, wherein I found the key which next day
unlocked with ease the barrier I had so long stormed in vain.

It was in the soft glow of late afternoon that I first entered the vault on
the abandoned slope. A spell was upon me, and my heart leaped with an exultation I can but ill
describe. As I closed the door behind me and descended the dripping steps by the light of my
lone candle, I seemed to know the way; and though the candle sputtered with the stifling reek
of the place, I felt singularly at home in the musty, charnel-house air. Looking about me, I
beheld many marble slabs bearing coffins, or the remains of coffins. Some of these were sealed
and intact, but others had nearly vanished, leaving the silver handles and plates isolated amidst
certain curious heaps of whitish dust. Upon one plate I read the name of Sir Geoffrey Hyde,
who had come from Sussex in 1640 and died here a few years later. In a conspicuous alcove was
one fairly well-preserved and untenanted casket, adorned with a single name which brought to
me both a smile and a shudder. An odd impulse caused me to climb upon the broad slab, extinguish
my candle, and lie down within the vacant box.

In the grey light of dawn I staggered from the vault and locked the chain of
the door behind me. I was no longer a young man, though but twenty-one winters had chilled my
bodily frame. Early-rising villagers who observed my homeward progress looked at me strangely,
and marvelled at the signs of ribald revelry which they saw in one whose life was known to be
sober and solitary. I did not appear before my parents till after a long and refreshing sleep.

Henceforward I haunted the tomb each night; seeing, hearing, and doing things
I must never reveal. My speech, always susceptible to environmental influences, was the first
thing to succumb to the change; and my suddenly acquired archaism of diction was soon remarked
upon. Later a queer boldness and recklessness came into my demeanour, till I unconsciously grew
to possess the bearing of a man of the world despite my lifelong seclusion. My formerly silent
tongue waxed voluble with the easy grace of a Chesterfield or the godless cynicism of a Rochester.
I displayed a peculiar erudition utterly unlike the fantastic, monkish lore over which I had
pored in youth; and covered the flyleaves of my books with facile impromptu epigrams which brought
up suggestions of Gay, Prior, and the sprightliest of the Augustan wits and rimesters. One morning
at breakfast I came close to disaster by declaiming in palpably liquorish accents an effusion
of eighteenth-century Bacchanalian mirth; a bit of Georgian playfulness never recorded in a
book, which ran something like this

I should not have ventured out that night; for the taint of thunder was in
the clouds, and a hellish phosphorescence rose from the rank swamp at the bottom of the hollow.
The call of the dead, too, was different. Instead of the hillside tomb, it was the charred cellar
on the crest of the slope whose presiding daemon beckoned to me with unseen fingers. As I emerged
from an intervening grove upon the plain before the ruin, I beheld in the misty moonlight a
thing I had always vaguely expected. The mansion, gone for a century, once more reared its stately
height to the raptured vision; every window ablaze with the splendour of many candles. Up the
long drive rolled the coaches of the Boston gentry, whilst on foot came a numerous assemblage
of powdered exquisites from the neighbouring mansions. With this throng I mingled, though I
knew I belonged with the hosts rather than with the guests. Inside the hall were music, laughter,
and wine on every hand. Several faces I recognised; though I should have known them better had
they been shrivelled or eaten away by death and decomposition. Amidst a wild and reckless throng
I was the wildest and most abandoned. Gay blasphemy poured in torrents from my lips, and in
my shocking sallies I heeded no law of God, Man, or Nature. Suddenly a peal of thunder, resonant
even above the din of the swinish revelry, clave the very roof and laid a hush of fear upon
the boisterous company. Red tongues of flame and searing gusts of heat engulfed the house; and
the roysterers, struck with terror at the descent of a calamity which seemed to transcend the
bounds of unguided Nature, fled shrieking into the night. I alone remained, riveted to my seat
by a grovelling fear which I had never felt before. And then a second horror took possession
of my soul. Burnt alive to ashes, my body dispersed by the four winds, <i>I might never lie
in the tomb of the Hydes!</i> Was not my coffin prepared for me? Had I not a right to rest till
eternity amongst the descendants of Sir Geoffrey Hyde? Aye! I would claim my heritage of death,
even though my soul go seeking through the ages for another corporeal tenement to represent
it on that vacant slab in the alcove of the vault. <i>Jervas Hyde</i> should never share the
sad fate of Palinurus!
